Title: New EC2 API released (2008-02-01): Elastic IPs and User Selectable Kernels
Date: 2008-03-27 20:30
Author: James
Tags: AWS
Slug: ec2_api_2008_02_01

Amazon has [released][] the latest version of the Elastic Compute Cloud
(EC2) API: [2008-02-01][].

This release includes a number of new features, two of which are very
interesting: Elastic IP Addresses and User Selectable Kernels.

<!--more-->

#### Elastic IP Addresses {#elastic_ip_addresses}

[Elastic IP Addresses][] allow you to allocate static IP addresses to
your AWS account, and programmatically associate these addresses with
your EC2 instances. This feature should make it feasible to map DNS
names directly to EC2 instances without using dynamic DNS naming
services. If your instance dies or if you plan to terminate it, you can
simply start another instance and reassign the elastic IP address to it.

Reserving (allocating) yourself an IP address costs 1¢ per hour that the
address is **not** associated with a running instance, and there is no
charge for addresses that are associated with an instance. By default
there is a limit of 5 IP addresses per account, but this limit can be
increased upon request.

#### User Selectable Kernels {#user_selectable_kernels}

[User Selectable Kernels][] allow you to user alternative Linux kernels
to the default one provided by Amazon. To make this possible, the EC2
environment will contain two new kinds of images in addition to the
Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) we are familiar with: Amazon Kernel Images
(AKIs) and Amazon RAM disk Images (ARIs). The new API and bundling tools
allow you to mix-and-match machine images with kernel and RAM disk
images, though you have to be careful doing this as not all the images
will work well together.

Note that you cannot create and load your own kernels. Instead, you must
choose from a set of kernels made available by Amazon and “selected
vendors”. Hopefully a future API version will make it possible for
anyone to create their own customized kernel images.

#### Availability Zones

In addition to these two features, the new API also includes support for
[Availability Zones][] that allow you to specify the location(s) where
your EC2 instances will run. Eventually the list of locations may
include multiple regions (ie. countries or geographical areas) but
currently all EC2 data centers are located in the United States. There
are a number of zones or locations within the US region, for example:
`us-east-1a`, `us-east-1b`, `us-east-1c`. This feature will help to
distribute, or concentrate, your EC2 instances depending on the
requirements of your application.

  [released]: http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID=1348&categoryID=86
    "Release announcement"
  [2008-02-01]: http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID=1344&categoryID=118
    "Documentation for EC2 API Version 2008-02-01"
  [Elastic IP Addresses]: http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID=1346&categoryID=112
  [User Selectable Kernels]: http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID=1345&categoryID=112
  [Availability Zones]: http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID=1347&categoryID=112
