Title: Gmail mobile phone application for Google Apps
Date: 2008-02-29 14:12
Author: James
Tags: Tips
Slug: gmail-mobile-for-apps

I have been using Google Apps – Google's set of hosted email and
collaboration tools that are available from your own domain name – for
some time now. The service works very well but it has one annoying
drawback: many of Google's other services and tools do not recognise
your Google Apps identity. To log in to the Google Groups site, for
example, you have to use a standard gmail.com account.

One of the tools that refused to work with my Google Apps account was
the Java-based mail application for older mobile phones. I have a modest
but functional Nokia phone with Symbian 40 OS (I think) and a rubbish
email client (I know). Google offered a nifty little email reader
application for phones like this that worked well for standard Gmail
accounts but not for Google Apps accounts, until now.

A Google Apps compatible version of this email client is now available
if you point your mobile browser at [m.google.com/a][]. It works like
the Gmail-only version of the application, but is an entirely new
version and even has a differently coloured blue icon to prove it. More
info about the application is available [here][], but be aware that it
only works with US English.

I am not sure when this application was actually released. I have gone
looking for it every couple of months for the last year, assuming Google
would create it sooner or later. Well, it wasn't soon, but finally later
has arrived.

  [m.google.com/a]: http://m.google.com/a
  [here]: http://www.google.com/intl/en/mobile/mail/index.html
